New self-identification proposal (#3989)
OAI/OpenAPI-Specification: proposals/2024-08-01-Self-Identification.md

# Self-Identification

## Metadata

|Tag |Value |
|---- | ---------------- |
|Proposal |[2024-08-01 Self-Identification](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/tree/main/proposals/{2024-08-01-Self-Identification-and-Bundling.md})|

> |Relevant Specification(s)|OAS, Arazzo|

Reviewer: Use the official name.  OpenAPI

Author: "OpenAPI" on its own is ambiguous, it has to be the "OpenAPI Specification".  I'll spell it out once here but otherwise I'm using the acronym, as is common throughout our materials.

Reviewer: I only meant to use it once, here, in the `Relevant specifications`.  Being part of this list, indicates it's a `Specification`.  So using `OpenAPI, Arazzo` is sufficient.

|Authors|[Henry Andrews](https://github.com/handrews)|
|Review Manager | TBD |
|Status |Proposal|
|Implementations |n/a|
|Issues | |
|Previous Revisions | |

## Change Log

|Date |Responsible Party |Description |
|---- | ---------------- | ---------- |
|2024-08-01 | @handrews | Initial submission

## Introduction

OpenAPI 3.1 references are treated as identifiers rather than locators.  This behavior is inherited from JSON Schema 2020-12, and is made more explicit in the forthcoming OAS 3.1.1 patch release.  This separation can support stable, self-assigned identifiers which allow certain sorts of OpenAPI Description refactoring _without_ having to re-write the values of `"$ref"` and similar keywords.  However, OAS lacks a mechanism to fully define such identifiers within each document, which substantially limits the benefits of this separation.

## Motivation

One of the main motivations for separating identity (URIs/IRIs) and location (URLs) is to have stable, persistent identifiers regardless of the resource's location.  Such identifiers are typically assigned within the resource.  There are two varieties:

> * Setting the complete resource's absolute URI, which is also used as the resource's base URI per [RFC3986§5.1.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3986.html#section-5.1.1) (example: [the Schema Object's `$id`](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-bhutton-json-schema-01.html#name-the-id-keyword))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Setting the complete resource's absolute URI, which is also used as the resource's base URI per [RFC3986 §5.1.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3986.html#section-5.1.1) (example: [the Schema Object's `$id`](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-bhutton-json-schema-01.html#name-the-id-keyword))
```
Hard to read without separating whitespace

* Setting a ["plain name" URI fragment](https://www.w3.org/TR/2012/WD-fragid-best-practices-20121025/#dfn-plain-name-fragid) that does not rely on the JSON/YAML structure of the document (example: [the Schema Object's `$anchor`](https://www.ietf.org/archive/id/draft-bhutton-json-schema-01.html#name-defining-location-independe), and technically also `$dynamicAnchor` although this proposal will not mention `$dynamicAnchor` further as its additional complexities are not relevant here).

> As suggested by the above examples, in 3.1 only the Schema Object can set stable, location-independent identifiers.  OpenAPI Description documents as a whole cannot do so, nor can other Objects within the document.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As suggested by the above examples, in OAS 3.1 only the Schema Object can set stable, location-independent identifiers.  OpenAPI Description documents as a whole cannot do so, nor can other Objects within the document.
```

    * Using extensions in development and HTTP content negotiation in production
    * Differing source control repository structure (particularly of shared documents) vs deployment directory and server layouts
* This separation is necessary (although not, on its own, sufficient) to implement [bundling](https://www.openapis.org/blog/2021/08/23/json-schema-bundling-finally-formalised).

For a more detailed real-world example, see the [OGC example](https://github.com/OAI/sig-moonwalk/discussions/72#user-content-ogc) in the Moonwalk discussion on imports.

Many of these use cases can be worked around, but only by restricting deployment options or performing error-prone reference target rewriting.  Many tools that perform reference rewriting do not take into account the added complexities of referencing in OAS 3.1 compared to 3.0 and earlier.

### Prior Art

Self-identification of resources with identity independent of location is common in the JSON Schema world.  This demonstrates that implementation is not just feasible but well-proven, particularly given that JSON Schema's `$id` is more complex to support than this proposal.

> The JSON Schema package used by the OASComply project includes a [schema catalog](https://jschon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorial/catalog.html) with [configurable file and network sources](https://jschon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/examples/file_based_schemas.html) to manage the the URI-to-URL mapping (local files can be considered `file:` URLs).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The JSON Schema package used by the [OASComply project](https://github.com/OAI/oascomply) includes a [schema catalog](https://jschon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorial/catalog.html) with [configurable file and network sources](https://jschon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/examples/file_based_schemas.html) to manage the the URI-to-URL mapping (local files can be considered `file:` URLs).
```

> The JSON Schema package used by the [OASComply](https://github.com/OAI/oascomply) project includes a [schema catalog](https://jschon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorial/catalog.html) with [configurable file and network sources](https://jschon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/examples/file_based_schemas.html) to manage the the URI-to-URL mapping (local files can be considered `file:` URLs).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The JSON Schema package used by the [OASComply](https://github.com/OAI/oascomply) project includes a [schema catalog](https://jschon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorial/catalog.html) with [configurable file and network sources](https://jschon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/examples/file_based_schemas.html) to manage the URI-to-URL mapping (local files can be considered `file:` URLs).
```

Self-identification is common in other formats as well.  Notably, the Atom format pioneered the use of [web links with `rel="self"`](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc4287.html#section-4.2.7.2) for this purpose.

## Proposed solution

> The proposal is a simplified analog of JSON Schema's `$id` that appears in exactly one place: a new `self` field in the root OpenAPI Object (OAS) and Arazzo Object (Arazzo/Workflows).  When referencing a document that has a `self` field the `self` field SHOULD be used in reference values so that reference values remain the same even if the document is moved.

Reviewer: Official Naming

```suggestion
The proposal is a simplified analog of JSON Schema's `$id` that appears in exactly one place: a new `self` field in the root OpenAPI Object (OAS) and Arazzo Object (Arazzo). When referencing a document with a `self` field, the `self` field SHOULD be used in reference values so that reference values remain the same even if the document is moved.
```

Placing the `self` field only in the OpenAPI Object or Arazzo Object makes it align with the existing bootstrapping process for parsing:

1.  Check the `openapi` or `arazzo` field in the root OpenAPI or Arazzo Object to determine the specification version
1.  Check the `jsonSchemaDialect` field for the default Schema Object dialect
1.  Determine the base URI per RFC3986 §5.1.2-5.1.4 (in most cases, use the retrieval URL per §5.1.3)
1.  ***NEW*** Check the `self` field for a base URI per RFC3986 §5.1.1; if it exists, resolve it against the base URI from the previous step and use the result as the document's actual base URI
1.  Continue parsing the remainder of the document as usual

As [OAS 3.1.1 clarifies](https://github.com/OAI/OpenAPI-Specification/pull/3758), it is already mandatory to separate location and identity for Schema Object support.

> Currently, associating a URI other than the current URL with a document to meet this requirement has to be done externally.  Many tools effectively by allowing the retrieval URL to be set manually, without verifying that the document actually lives at the given URL.

Reviewer: `Many tools effectively by allowing the retrieval...`

I think you missed something here

> With the new `self` field, tools need to be configured to know where to look to find the document if `self` value does not match its location.  The JSON Schema implementation linked under "Prior Art" above demonstrates several ways to accomplish this.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the new `self` field, tools need to be configured to find a document if the `self` value does not match its location. The JSON Schema implementation linked under "Prior Art" above demonstrates several ways to accomplish this.
```

## Detailed design

> This is written for the structure of the OAS, but it should be clear how it would be adapted for Arazzo.  Some amount of guidance around how to configure tools to resolve `self`-references that do not match locations probably also needs to be added in the sections on reference resolution and base URIs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is written for the structure of the OAS, but it should be clear how it would be adapted for Arazzo. Some amount of guidance around how to configure tools to resolve `self`-references that do not match locations needs to be added in the sections on reference resolution and base URIs.
```

```MARKDOWN
## OpenAPI Object

### Fixed Fields

Field Name | Type | Description
---|:---|:---

> self | `URI-reference` (without a fragment) | Sets the URI of this document, which also serves as its base URI in accordance with [RFC 3986 §5.1.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3986#section-5.1.1); the value MUST NOT be the empty string and MUST NOT contain a fragment

Reviewer: ```suggestion
self | `URI-reference` (without a fragment) | Sets the URI of this document, which also serves as its base URI in accordance with [RFC 3986 §5.1.1](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc3986#section-5.1.1); the value MUST NOT be an empty string and MUST NOT contain a fragment
```

Author: "the empty string" is [the common usage](https://www.google.com/search?q=site%3Aietf.org+%22the+empty+string%22) in this sort of context.

```

## Backwards compatibility

OAS 3.2 and Arazzo 1.1 documents that do not use the `self` field will behave exactly the same as OAS 3.1 and Arazzo 1.0 documents.  The change in minor version is sufficient to manage the compatibility issues, as no software that only supports up to 3.1/1.0 should attempt to parse 3.2/1.1 documents.

## Alternatives considered

### Plain name fragments in every Object

> While including `self` in every Object would produce the same complexity as JSON Schema's nested `$id`, we could just adopt an equivalent of JSON Schema's `$anchor` keyword, which (like HTML/XML's `id` attribute) creates a plain name fragment that is not tied to the location of the Object in the JSON/YAML structure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Including `self` in every Object would produce the same complexity as JSON Schema's nested `$id` but, that introduces unnecessary schema bloat rather than a single identifier at the root.
Adopting an equivalent of JSON Schema's `$anchor` keyword, which like (HTML/XML's `id` attribute), creates a plain name fragment that is not tied to the location of the Object in the JSON/YAML structure.
```

> Handling this would require scanning all Objects for the keyword prior to declaring that a reference target with a plain name fragment cannot be resolved.  This would likely be done on document load, but could be deferred and done incrementally as-needed when unknown fragments are encountered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Handling `$id` or `$anchor` requires scanning all Objects for a defined keyword prior to declaring that a reference target with a plain name fragment cannot be resolved. This would likely be done on document load, but could be deferred and done incrementally as-needed when unknown fragments are encountered.
```
